and welcome back to a fresh episode of
business growth show I'm your host Sam
Dunning and to check out my SEO
playbooks B2B marketing guides free
podcasts resources or whenever you're
ready to apply to work with us head over
to Sam Dunning
dotorg so today joining me we've got
Trinity noan Trinity is a VP of
marketing over at user gems we're going
to be getting into how you can unlock a
sales pipeline via relationships we're
going to be chatting about what this new
magical what this new sorcery is of
using relationships and turning into
revenue and pipeline why it works how
you can leverage Champions what they are
and how you can utilize your Champion to
drive pipeline been talking a little bit
about marketing playbooks what to avoid
in a bit of a step by step so with that
welcome to the show Trinity how's it
going great uh good afternoon morning my
time but thanks Sam for having me here a
pleasure looking forward to the
conversation so getting stuck right into
it straight away relationship F Focus
sales pipeline what what does that
really mean
Trinity um it means so many different
things especially today when we talk a
lot about AI but specifically um what I
want to share is like this one Playbook
that I personally love because we're
using it and it helps me with uh
relieving some of my pipeline anxiety so
I want to share with other marketers and
sales folks out there and hopefully that
helps but relationship based so I think
like so for us it means like following
your customers your users even your
close loss prospects as they move to New
organizations throughout their careers
they know you already they trusted you
before um they they have the
relationship with you and that's going
to give you the competitive Advantage um
to break into new
organizations uhuh so we're talking
about following prospects
that we've done business with before or
that we have conversations with before
as they've perhaps moved on to new new
companies or new sectors or or that kind
of thing right correct like previous
customers previous Champions so we just
call everyone Champions people who love
you got it got it um and do they have to
be like getting into it straight away do
they have to be previous customers or
can they just be people that were
perhaps in the pipeline before that
maybe didn't become customers or uh all
of the above so I think we get right to
the the the meat of it so it depends on
your organization who you define as your
Champions so most people would think
about close one opportunity contacts AKA
people who bought your products or
Services before and then the second they
was thinking about oh the admin Empower
users so like if you were in a SAS world
right so they might not have been
involved in the sales process but they
talk to or like knew your customer
success or they use your product a lot
so these are the real champions so
that's the first bucket um key Champions
the second bucket that's a little bit
less obvious is like the Happy users so
if you're are SAS of company you have
like thousand 10 thousand 100 thousand
of users if you can use net Pro net
promoter scores NPS or product usage
data you can segment out the ones that
really like your products so that's a
second bucket the third bucket like you
mentioned Sam we call like key prospects
so these are close loss opportunity
Conta so they didn't buy you then maybe
there are a lot of different reasons
timing budget priorities but doesn't
mean they won't be interested in buying
you at the next organization maybe
better timing better fit now even open
opportunity contact too sales cycle is
getting so long we see Champions leaving
company mid sales um cycle all the time
now so they already a lot warmer like
marketing speak comparing to your top
ofun leads understood what was the first
bucket I didn't quite catch that Trinity
the key Champions okay and the
difference between them and the second
bucket so key champ we call it key
Champions it's basically close one
opportunity contacts and then admin
power users and that's how we think
about it but obviously every business
defined this differently we're just
ranking them by hot like how hot this
contact
is understood understood okay so we
basically got close one customers we've
got power users and then we've got the
prospects that didn't buy but still
opportunities and you've mentioned
Champion a few times I don't think we've
really used that term much in the the
347 or 348 episodes we have but I see it
flying about a lot on
LinkedIn especially from from kind of
myself with with a sales background that
kind of moved into marketing what what
does a champion really mean in a in a
B2B setting I guess and I guess it does
come from like the sales world so
Champion is just someone who advocate
for you during the sales process right
um so we use it broadly to kind of
encapsulate the people who would
Champion for you advocate for you um but
then what does that mean like different
companies define champion differently um
and that's why we want to keep it
relatively vague it depends on your
business got it okay cool um so I want
to talk about I want to lay down a bit
of a step by step for the audience on
how they can ESS put this into play
themselves how they can start
identifying I suppose the buckets that
are going to be relevant for them from
these different three types of users and
how they can then leverage the
relationships as we've not talked about
that too much just yet to then drive
sales pipelines so I suppose where do we
start off like what is the first thing
we should do if we're thinking yeah I
think I've got a few few prospects in
each of these buckets I think I can
leverage them but what what's the first
step step that an organization should
take take yeah maybe um I would do the
the reverse so kind of like the why
first before we get into like the steps
so like why does it matter um whether it
relevant for you right so so for us um
so not for us sorry like more like the Y
part so if you in SAS this year so this
year has been really challenging uh
especially in the SAS world and there
are a lot of stats that's been
shared out there like from Gartner
Forester you name any like kind of like
big organiz research organizations so
Sal cycle is getting longer I think it's
20% longer now I think salesport share
that an average deal cycle is longer um
and then you couple that with the deal
size actually got smaller because budget
is smaller so vendor ran a a survey in
Q2 and I think like the average deal
size now reduced by
45% and then on top of it um the the
average buying group has increased by
33% I think G2 did this research so it
means more people get involved in every
single buying decision especially theas
Suite so it's just harder to um to sell
in this environment and why is that the
case I think like in in like you know
the 2020 2021 there was a lot of fear of
missing out there are a lot of new
technology uh growth at all cost so we
got to like try out new things so that
sentiment doesn't exist anymore so it's
now more like fear of messing up that
people just want to make sure that they
buy the right thing the sure thing um
you know so because of all that stuff
this this is where the relationship part
the the people who already champ like
already Champion for you before this is
kind of like the wedge that helps you
kind of gain that trust with Buyers now
uhuh okay yeah that's this um there a
research last quarter by trust radius so
they surveyed 1,500 buyers every year
and this is really interesting because
they ask buyers the same set of question
year after year for seven years in a row
trying to see if there's any change in
the trend and this year was the first
time that they noticed a significant
change like there are more people the
buyers this year saying that they refer
to their own prior experience with the
vendor when they make the buying
decision now
and that was never the case it's in the
top three now it kind of goes back to
the whole like fear of messing up I want
to buy the sh thing I see so before did
before did buyers prospects not they
weren't really too bothered about kind
of sticking with old vendors that they'
had experiences with but only recently
that's become quite key yeah me I think
in the past people always used can kind
of like refer back to oh I know that
vendor I trust them but then they also
like money was cheap then too and we got
to grow grow grow so doesn't hurt the
opportunity cost is low so it doesn't
hurt to try new things try new vendors
there's nothing to lose there but versus
now budget is scarce so you're more
cautious a lot more cautious I suppose
it's about being risk diverse right
especially what's going on in B2B Tech
right now like you say like funding is
so much more difficult to get and growth
is difficult to get as marketers listen
this like pipeline is really hard to
come by these days for sure for sure so
s yeah so that's why it's kind of like
the why like relationship it's kind of
like your wedge to get into the new
organization so I think that's kind of
like the why
where we advocate for like leveraging
the relationship you already have it
took so much to build to win those
customer in the past why do you let them
go once they move into new org
organization why don't you kind of like
following them nurturing that
relationship from the sales side that
makes the sales conversation a lot
easier so you can reach out hey congrats
we miss working with you company act but
you know let's keep the conversation
going when you're ready to buy
again got it I imagine there's a lot of
opportunity that gets missed by B2B
companies on on this front because I
imagine it's quite easy to do right if
perhaps the the person that you were
doing business with whether that was
like I don't know marketing leader or
sales leader or revops leader or whoever
was your point of contact that you were
doing business with directly that
organization if they suddenly go and
then new exec comes into the org and
they're like well I've already got a
prior relationship with this company or
I want to go and find a new organization
to do business with because quite often
from my experience anyway running a B2B
SEO web web agency when a new contact
comes in they've quite often got their
own ideas so that can me our
relationship can go out the window
because they've got their own thoughts
and Visions exactly actually I was gonna
say in agency world you see this a lot
for sure for sure but but yeah you do
miss out like agency I think think
agency you usually have like one or two
main contacts per client but if you like
running SAS products you have like
hundreds of thousands sometimes
depending on the type of products that
you have so people miss a lot of these
opportunities and we we did do a
research like we analyze like our
customers before they bought the product
and after and how many and then look
back in the past like how many of these
opportunities a job movement in this
91%
91% of your customers that left to new
organization your reps didn't pick up on
it because it's just so many you don't
think about it right reps join
Organization for two years mov to
different orc with different team all
that relationship's gone it's lost so
and you have a lot of users too that
your team hadn't met yet so and I
suppose there's a few factors as well
depending on the size of your own
company and organization and the churn
of your own sales team like how
effective are they going to then manage
those contacts that have gone and if
your sales team that are managing them
have churn fast then it's not something
that's going to be tightly seen yeah so
it's I suppose there's a lot of areas of
neglect on on this this side of things
interesting stuff um yeah so there's a
lot of upsides there's a lot of upsides
from lot upside yeah the downside is
which we're GNA get to the Tactical part
so actually the downside of this concept
of like Champion tracking let just call
it like that is that it's a real really
simple concept because I think anyone in
sales and marketing we've seen customers
come back and we've seen that these are
the hottest leads because they convert
so quickly and so well but to if you
actually think about how to
operationalize it how to roll this out
to your team it gets really complex
really quickly so we've been doing it
for this H for like four years and even
to this day during our wind loss
interviews even our customers said like
there are so many different scenarios
that we didn't think of I wish I thought
of it because it's so complicated so
we're going to get to the the the
Tactical stuff so the way I would break
it down hopefully make it a little bit
easier is the first part is think about
the
inputs um who do you define as your
Champions or who matters most to
you um and then the second piece is the
output so not all job changes are
created equal right they're not the same
right they have to land in your Target
accounts have the right title so what
kind of change that matters most to your
team because you only want to surface
the most relevant
leads and then the third component so
inputs and then outputs the first comp
the third component is um actioning how
do you make it so easy for your teams to
act on this signal when it's surfaced
without them having to like you know do
a tons of clicks or do a lot of research
automate all that stuff as much as as
you can so that you can see the ROI from
this
program so okay let's get into each one
each one yeah so in the input side we
talk about close one opportunity contact
so the buyers power and admin users
right um for SAS it's um if you have a
lot of like happy users that's a second
bucket because even though they were
individual contributor before doesn't
mean that they won't become a buyer in
the next order work right or they can
still advocate for you to the buyer so
that's the second one and the third one
is the key prospect that we talk about
close loss opportunity uh open up
opportunity
contact
okay all right so yeah we've got those
three buckets in the input so we've got
three sections and within section one of
the inputs we've got the Champions and
those are the close one deals those are
the power users and the Clos lost or the
open open opportunities in our
pipeline so we identify those within our
current I guess CRM CRM um so the CRM
for the for the users if you have a if
you have product database somewhere um
like outside of the CRM I'd highly
encourage to partner with your product
team and see if you can sync that over
and bring in the product usage data that
helps with segmenting out your user base
okay segment out the user base and what
are we doing once we''ve got of
identified those three buckets of close
one the power users and the Clos loss or
open opportunities yeah then we go into
the output so now you set up the filters
for like what kind of changes do I care
about so you think about like the ICP
ideal customer profile account criteria
so what kind of companies do you want to
Target so you know typical fog Graphics
technographics employee size Revenue
size industry goo Etc so that's the
first filter the second filter is a
Persona who are you selling to people do
switch careers so you only want to know
the ones that like land and with the
right title right so marketers know
about this piece but one thing I highly
encourage marketers to think about when
they set up these kind of filters for
Persona is think about keyword
exclusions to really narrow this list
down so for example user gems one of our
Persona is
marketing but we don't want all
marketing titles so when we set up the
filters us we exclude like content
marketer or like brand marketer right so
the more you can like the stricter you
can set these filters um the most
relevant job changes leads will show
like will resurfaced because you don't
want to a bunch of noise for your team
so that's the output side okay all right
now we're going to the the action part
this is a part where people get really
tripped up on because so many teams can
benefit so most people think that
champion tracking benefits for like
pipeline generation and it is like so
marketing and SDR the top the funnel but
it's actually fun for the entire Revenue
team so sales team too like in an open
opportunity if a champion joined that
company uh like a previous customer
joined that company during the open up
that can help you accelerate deals and
then on the flip end from the client
management so customer
success so if a person Like A Champion
leaves your customer accounts that's a
churn risk kind of like what you said
about like in the agency world and if
anybody new joining to backfill that P
that person position that's also a very
big churn risk so the customer success
of client managers also need to be
alerted
right I think we might need to to break
that down a little bit further mainly
for for Simple Minds like mine that can
only process a small amount of
information at anyone stage um I'm I'm
up to it so far I'm up to like
input work out your Clos one ja power
users your Clos lost or open Ops then go
through to stage two where you basically
identify the ICP the idol client profile
within that to make sure we've got the
right types of companies the right job
titles the right personas that we
actually want to be doing business with
then we get to the stage three yeah of
actually working out pipeline for our
our sales team whether that is sdrs or
I'm guessing account XX or yeah perhaps
a mix
a yeah depends on some companies the SDR
would be under the marketing team and
some companies the SDR been under sales
right so basically whoever that
responsible for generating the top layer
of your funnel gotcha so what we would
recommend in like the actioning is like
find out where your SDR spend their time
okay so they spend their time on like
Outreach sales LS you know like the
sales engagement tool then automatically
like set up an automation to Route the
job change lead to the right
sequences so they don't have to go into
your CRM and make the decision and
adding people in etc etc right because
manual steps is just mean it's not going
to be done
consistently so if you set up all the
right sequences for the scenarios then
you add them in there then the only need
to do is just open the tool and then
execute the task uhuh yeah got it yeah
and then for the marketing so if you run
account-based marketing and we we do a
lot of ABM here so we have like 10,000
ICP accounts and we go after 200
accounts every month so it's really
important for us to know which when to
go after which account so we use this uh
Champion tracking signals to prioritize
so we would go after company A and B
because we found out in the last three
months we had a number of previous
Champions just had just joined these
companies so we bubble and prioritize
these accounts to go after
okay okay so for a company that perhaps
wants to just get started with
this how do you make it manageable
initially because I can imagine this can
get quite messy quite fast if you had
say hundreds or thousands of Champions
depending on the size of your org and
also your ACV your average contact value
if you're dealing with really small
deals and you've got tons of customers I
imagine this can be a lot of data to
work with quite quickly so what is like
quite a smart amount of opportunities to
work with initially and I guess some
smart triggers to put in place so then
if if someone moves job or moves to a
new organization you can track that and
you can start with something that's
quite manageable perfect question it's
true um start small crawl walk run so
when you start out think of one type of
input one type of contacts you want to
track so close one opportunity contact
typically is the first
type of input that people want to roll
out so one type of input and then one
type of output so land it in our ICP
account in a certain region or certain
Persona so one input one output and then
just work with one team so like pick
either an ABM team if that's your main
thing or SDR team don't try to roll out
across like all the use cases and
playbooks and entire organization so
once you set up all of the filters that
we talked about just Implement one
Playbook let it run for about two to
three weeks you will see quick wins
because it's small manageable the teams
like have a lot of attention once you
get a few wins in the first two three
weeks that's when you add in the second
play so again the second play also one
input one output and one team that
benefits do it again rinse and repeat
every two three weeks so after about
like three months that's when you'll be
able to implement the entire play that
benefit from top of funnel to bottom
funnel to post
sales gotcha makes sense
now when it comes to working with
triggers so for example I don't know
we've got we're working with three
brackets right we're working with Clos
one power users working with Clos lost
or open opportunities that are still in
the
pipeline when you get a trigger IE a
prospect within our ICP has just moved
let's say to a new company and El like
oh I need I need to get back a hold
of this person and do some business ASAP
um is the trigger like automatically
send them an email like what you've left
company book a demo with us um or is it
like a bit more tactful than that iect
gives them a call or maybe sends a gift
in the mail or yeah what is a typical
flow that you recommend companies take
with kind of these three buckets uh I
love your question it's like all the
right questions and I I promise
whoever's watching this we not pre we
didn't pre prepare any of these
questions this is so great um be human
oh my goodness uh if anyone's listening
to this please do not um bombard your
like warmest contact or your best
Champions with like this you know with
the sales breath um that's what people
call it in sales so when someone when
the trigger happens so the person
changed the job
um the first thing you when you reach
out to is be human think of it like
almost like a friends when your friends
start a new gig what do you do you you
reach out and congratulate them right
like hey going to miss you at the last
company but I'm sure you're going to
kick butt in the next uh
orc if you have a gifting program I
would say like send out a gift like hey
just something small to get you start it
in your new role and that's it do not
ask for an appointment a meeting don't
ask for anything because if you do then
that just ruined the entire relationship
they know why you your buyers are smart
they know why you reaching out right
staying top of mind that's your goal and
then this is this is why like sales
engagement tool is so great because then
you can set kind of like the next steps
so they don't forget two four weeks
later give the person a chance to kind
of like you know um get their feet wet
when you Circle back like hey just
circling back how things going your end
just like have you ask a friend how
things going and then like do you know
if like this would be a right time or
not just it's all about the messaging be
tasteful be human yeah yeah yeah makes
makes sense so that's that's good um I
get that I mean obviously you don't want
to bombard them because I'm sure they've
got plenty going on if they've just
moved an organization they need to
settle in and yeah you just want to like
you just want them to remember you and I
know it sounds really um fluffy but
internally we've been running running
this place for display for our own
pipeline generation for four years right
and and these sequences always have
between 80 to 95% open rates and 27 per
response rate like 20 to
27% so it works I know it sounds scary
from like a sales perspec to perspective
to not ask for anything but usually the
best time best thing to do when you want
something is don't ask for
it so is that like a flow for a past
customer that's moved organization that
you've just
shared and how would that compare to
perhaps someone that we lost or that
might be in the PIP that's let's say
ghosted us or gone quiet or dead in the
wind how would you approach that one
yeah yeah so like in the first email
like you could say like hey um just
notice that like you just start a new
role like congrats again like just
congrats right because they it was close
lost but didn't mean like that means
that they still know you so you can
still reaching out um the same way first
email do not ask for anything when you
Circle
back that's when you can do your
prospecting and you can say things like
um hey checking and how things going uh
I know that a few moons ago when you
were at the last company you were like
interested in us like X to solve this
type of like challenges curious if those
challenges are still relevant at your
new
org to acknowledge that you know what
happened and you can set all these
things up as long as you know you set up
like the automation for different
scenarios um and then and and tie it
back to is it like close one opportunity
contact or close last opportunity
contact do you folks always use email or
do you ever use cool or any other
channels uh our sequences have uh like
multi like it has different um channels
so call emails
LinkedIn yeah I think those are the main
ones and we have gifting programs that
we kind of like weave in throughout as
well got it I suppose it depends on the
the value of the customer or the
potential deal size depending on how
intense it is and what you send them and
the approach you take right yeah you can
you can U build out you can segment your
sequences based on like is the new is
that title is director and above or like
I see in different you can tier your
gifting programs and how many how
intensive your sequences are to got it
okay cool yeah so yeah I think we've
talked about kind of quite a nice
stepbystep flow of how to do it in terms
of identifying the opportunities kind of
nailing down the ICP the ID profiles and
then actually having a tacal way to
reach out for them is there anything
else that follows on this or anything
else that people tuning in need to
consider um I think if you get I mean
that's a lot already to digest like I
said like this plays sound simple but
it's really complex so just just start
out with that and if you see success and
you want to scale that's when like a lot
of the things behind the scene like how
do I notify people outside of just
sequences can I slack them send them a
an email like you know all these things
that you can layer that in later on but
I wouldn't recommend trying to like boil
the ocean from
beginning can I ask quite a difficult
question yeah go for it so this is this
is going to be directly to related to
user gems and mainly because I'm nosy um
so obviously as as a tech company you're
probably investing in channels like PID
uh search ads Google ads LinkedIn ads
Etc your own pipeline using this
approach what percentage of your revenue
is through this approach as compared to
say let's say LinkedIn ads paid Google
search any other channels maybe G2 yeah
curious to know oh absolutely I'm open
to chair so in our board deck I do have
to report where our pipeline came from
and the way we look at the sources is
not like by like Channel like marketing
channel but it's like the program so
inbound outbound referral uh AE Source
Partners Etc right okay and champ and
tracking on its own is its own source
because it's pull in different like
resources from the marketing side and
SDR so to answer your question this one
the champion tracking has consistently
been contributing between 12% to
16% of our sales accepted pipeline every
quarter um and this
year 22% of our closed one Revenue came
from this
program it's a lot more efficient
comparing to so we are very heavy on
outbound side because we like to do to
us outbound is like when we go out there
and together so like ABM we would
consider as outbound like events right
okay um so compared to that one and then
even compared to like the what we call
inbound is all the like Google like the
paay search paid social and stuff like
that this one's a lot more efficient
because it's basically just running in
the background this is really crazy it
sounds a lot and very intense uh
intensive based on what I Shar so far
but once you do the leg work like a week
just setting up all the input output
filter and like the
sequences it just runs in the background
like you can ask any SDR on our team our
demand as well it's just a program that
is always on so we don't spend a lot of
resources on that and that's why it's
very coste efficient nice yeah and does
that does it tend to be similar for for
clients as well does it tend to be kind
of quite a hyp percentage source of of
their revenue well as well I I imagine
like you say it takes a while to
actually get the machine fully in play
and and do all these tactics that we've
talked about and slowly Build It Up well
it's like it's it takes about like a
month to set up everything so it doesn't
take that much to because you only need
like one or two plays to show like
opportunities and then you can build the
rest right in three months um for all
customers so like people have been
sending me messages saying that this
this program on their end is number one
one or number two or number three
sources of pipeline um someone just
shared yesterday in our customer uh we
saw in the customer post SL channel is
that this program literally saved their
year uh when pipeline has been so hard
to come by it's literally like right now
they're looking at the Q4 and it's
saving their number this year because of
this nice and I imagine the sales cycle
is typically faster because you've
already got that previous relationship
and they already
in the case of unless there are perhaps
a cloth lost or a prospect that didn't
buy they already probably trust you
quite a lot because you've deal business
with them and you've had various
conversations and such yeah true um
actually even for the close loss
Prospect the sales cycle is still
shorter I talked to someone in cyber
security company yesterday of course
it's not the hardest comparing to
previous customers right but they
already went through the entire
awareness consideration process with you
so they know everything about you um so
it's that we found it's about 54%
shorter sales cycle uh comparing to like
just call New Leads makes sense they
already know you so you don't have to go
through the whole entire process
again got it Trinity very much enjoyed
the conversation thanks very much for
for going on and thanks for openly
sharing your own stats um no problem I
share it on LinkedIn all the time so you
find me on LinkedIn you see a lot of
that not there you go you you're like me
you don't mind getting grilled good
stuff so with that please do tell us
more about heav when tuning in can learn
more about yourself user gems and any
way you'd like to send the audience yeah
um if you want to connect with me uh I'm
on LinkedIn so Trinity new um with user
gem so you should be able to find me
with the the teal background uh to find
out more about user gem so it's just
user gems.com I know it's a lot of
information that I share today so we
actually have um a Playbook Library
where we break down we give you like our
entire sequences on the website that you
can just copy and paste and give it a
try so just go to user gems.com
playbooks and um there you go awesome
we'll put all of those links over in the
show notes at businessgrowth do
marketing and I want to thank you once
again for coming on treny no problem
thanks for having me this was fun always
a pleasure off to get you back on in the
future enjoyed it um got to give a big
shout out to the Show sponsored deal
front the go to market platform for gdpr
compliant leads for your Sal and goto
Market team you can grab a demo over at
dealr tocom as always if you enjoyed
today's episode of rating or review on
Apple is appreciated or subscribe on
YouTube and we shall catch you on the
next one for more nobs B2B marketing
tips to grow your business and grow your
Revenue thanks everyone for tuning in
catch you soon